---
title : Spectrum of Bianchi I in Loop Quantum Cosmology
layout : post
use_math : true
---

A Simple Form of the Bianchi I Constraint
=========================================

Introduction
----------------

Loop Quantum Cosmology has quickly developed into an active field of research.  The FLRW model has been intensely analyzed.  The k=0 model is exactly soluble - allowing one to see the bounce analytically as well as put an upper bound on the energy density.  Extensive numerical evolutions have been run for the homogeneous models.  For the anisotropic models though the constraint operator has been to complex to allow for analysis beyond the effective classical equations.  Where the FLRW constraint operator preserved a regular lattice in the volume, the Bianchi I constraint preserves a regular lattice in the volume but takes values on a dense subset of the reals in the anisotropic parameters.  This poses complications for any numerical analysis - looking for eigenstates of the constraint, with numerical evolution of semi-classical states,...

In this paper we present a dramatic simplification of the Bianchi I constraint allowing for both numerical evolution and possibly analytical study.  I will overview the classical framework then the
loop quantum quantization and finally the simplification.  Given the simplification I will probe the
spectrum of the constraint operator.

Classical Framework
----------------

We introduce a fiducial metric ${}^o q_{ab}$, ${}^o ds^2 = dx^2+dy^2+dz^2$, and a fiducial cell $V$
whose edges lie along the coordinates directions $x,y,z$.  The fiducial cell has edge lengths $L_i$  and volume ${}^oV=L_1L_2L_3$ as measured by the fiducial metric.

Due the symmetries of the model the connection and triad can be reduced to the following form

$
\begin{equation}
A_a^i =: c^i (L^i)^{-1} {}^o \omega_a^i \quad E^a_i =: p_i L_i V_o^{-1} \sqrt{{}^o q} {}^o e^a_i
\end{equation}
$